.\" pythonall(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for pythonrs.
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): every section of the reference in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/pythonall.1
.\" Install:      cp man/pythonall.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH PYTHONALL 1 "2026-07-23" "pythonrs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pythonall \- the pythonrs comprehensive reference (invocation, language,
architecture, bytecode VM + Cranelift JIT, LSP, DAP, inline-Rust FFI)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all\-in\-one
.B pythonrs
manual, modeled on
.BR zshall (1).
It concatenates the major sections of the pythonrs reference into a single page so
you can grep with `/`:
.RS 2
.PP
.B 1.  INVOCATION
.RB "\(em " "flags, files, exit status"
.br
.B 2.  LANGUAGE
.RB "\(em " "the Python the runtime parses and runs"
.br
.B 3.  ARCHITECTURE
.RB "\(em " "lex \[->] parse \[->] lower \[->] fusevm VM + JIT + rkyv cache"
.br
.B 4.  TOOLING
.RB "\(em " "\-\-lsp, \-\-dap, inline-Rust FFI, AOT, dumps"
.br
.B 5.  DIAGNOSTICS
.RB "\(em " "error format and common messages"
.RE
.SH 1. INVOCATION
.B python
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR [\fIARGS\fR...] runs a Python script.
.B \-c \fISRC\fR
executes a one\-liner, and
.B \-m \fIMODULE\fR
runs a library module as a script.
.B \-\-lsp
and
.B \-\-dap
speak their protocols over stdio and take no file. See
.BR python (1)
for the per\-flag table.
.SH 2. LANGUAGE
pythonrs runs Python 3 as ordinary compiled bytecode. It lexes and parses the
source, lowers it to
.B fusevm
instructions, and lets the shared engine execute and JIT\-compile them. Arithmetic
and comparisons lower to native fusevm ops; Python\-specific behaviour \(em
truthiness, attribute and method dispatch,
.BR str / list
concatenation, bignum promotion, and object construction \(em is served by the
.B PyHost
object heap, whose
.BR str / list / dict / tuple / set
and instance cells ride through the VM as handles. It is the first compiled
standalone Python runtime.
.SH 3. ARCHITECTURE
.EX
Python source \[->] lexer \[->] parser (AST) \[->] lower to fusevm bytecode \[->] fusevm VM + Cranelift JIT
.EE
.PP
There is no bespoke VM or JIT; execution and codegen live in fusevm, the shared
engine behind zshrs, stryke, awkrs, elisp, and ruby. Every ordinary run
transparently caches compiled bytecode in
.I ~/.pythonrs/scripts.rkyv
(an rkyv shard); a cache hit skips lex/parse/lower entirely.
.SH 4. TOOLING
.SS Language server (\-\-lsp)
.B python \-\-lsp
speaks LSP over stdio: completion and hover from the symbol corpus (the same table
that generates
.IR docs/reference.html ),
and diagnostics from the runtime's own parser. It is read\-only; no output reaches
the terminal.
.SS Debugger (\-\-dap)
.B python \-\-dap
speaks the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio: line breakpoints, single\-stepping,
a stack trace, and inspection of a frame's locals. Program output is captured and
forwarded as
.B output
events so it never corrupts the protocol channel.
.SS Inline-Rust FFI
A
.B rust { pub extern "C" fn \[u2026] }
block desugars to an internal
.BR __rust_compile ,
compiles to a cached
.B cdylib
on first run (via the shared
.B fusevm
FFI runtime), and its exports become callable by name from Python
.RB ( src/rust_ffi.rs ).
.SS Deployment and dumps
An AOT native compiler links a standalone executable.
.B \-\-dump\-tokens
prints the token stream,
.B \-\-dump\-ast
the parsed AST, and
.B \-\-disasm
a fusevm bytecode disassembly \(em each then exits.
.SH 5. DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are written to standard error in Python's own exception form. The process
exits non\-zero on an unhandled exception and 0 on success.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR python (1)
The focused invocation page. Source and issue tracker:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/pythonrs
.SH AUTHOR
Part of the fusevm language family.
