.TH PYTHON 1 "2026" "pythonrs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
python \- Python on fusevm, a compiled Python runtime (bytecode VM + Cranelift JIT)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B python
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR] [\fIARGS\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pythonrs
lexes and parses Python 3 and lowers it to
.B fusevm
bytecode executed on a three\-tier Cranelift JIT over a PyHost object heap.
There is no bespoke VM or JIT; execution and codegen live in fusevm.
.PP
Every ordinary run transparently caches compiled bytecode in
.I ~/.pythonrs/scripts.rkyv
(rkyv shard); a cache hit skips lex/parse/lower entirely.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c \fISRC\fR
Execute a one\-liner instead of a file.
.TP
.B \-m \fIMODULE\fR [\fIargs\fR...]
Run a library module as a script. Delegates to the embedded CPython
.RB ( runpy ),
so
.BR "\-m pip" ,
.BR "\-m venv" ,
.BR "\-m http.server" ,
and
.B \-m json.tool
behave exactly like
.BR "python3 \-m" .
Every token after the module name is the module's own
.BR sys.argv .
Requires the stdlib\-ffi bridge (the default build).
.TP
.B \-u
Force stdout/stderr unbuffered (CPython
.BR \-u / PYTHONUNBUFFERED ).
.TP
.B \-E \-I \-O \-S \-B \-W \fIACTION\fR
CPython interpreter flags, accepted for drop\-in compatibility.
.B \-u
and
.B \-W
take real effect via the embedded interpreter; the rest are tolerated no\-ops.
.TP
.B \-\-build
Ahead\-of\-time compile the script to a standalone native executable.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-bytecode
Print the compiled fusevm bytecode for the script and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-tokens
Print the lexer token stream for the script and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-ast
Print the parsed AST for the script and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-disasm
Print a fusevm bytecode disassembly listing for the script and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-repl
Start the interactive REPL.
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
Speak the Language Server Protocol over stdio.
.TP
.B \-\-dap
Speak the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PYTHONRS_TRACE
When set, log bytecode\-cache hit/miss to stderr.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.pythonrs/scripts.rkyv
The rkyv bytecode cache shard.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR python3 (1)
